“ODIs will bring batsmen more into the game, so a good chance to make a statement and win our first-ever series here,” Virat Kohli said in a pre-ODI series press conference.

After losing the first two Tests, India showed gumption and won the third Test with a complete team effort. The Indian pacers are in some form as they picked up 20 wickets in the last Test of the series played at the Wanderers, in Johannesburg.

AB de Villiers will be unavailable for the first three ODIs with a finger injury and this will be the first time since December, 2005 that South Africa will play an ODI against India without him. It will be a big opportunity for the player who comes in his place and captain Faf du Plessis confirmed that Aiden Markram will take his place.

"AB is not playing this game, so Aiden Markram is coming into his place, giving him an opportunity to bat in different places in the batting order, because I feel it's a great way to evolve your own game and learn in difficult situations and times in ODI cricket. So that will be a nice learning curve for him and hopefully it will yield some good runs for us," the South African skipper added.

It will be interesting to see whether India will go in with two spinners or not as they have been the game-changers for them in the middle-overs in the past two years. The big challenge for India will be to find a satisfactory answer to who bats at No 4. Shreyas Iyer has played well in his first ODI series, against Sri Lanka, while Dinesh Karthik has the best average among all the Indian batsmen at No 4 in the past two years.

The ODI series will be of six matches, so it will always provide a chance to both the teams to make a comeback in the series, but it will be vital for India to win as many matches as they can and as early as possible.

Let’s look at some important numbers from ODIs played between India and South Africa over the years.

India have a poor record against South Africa in South Africa. They have won only around 18 percent of the matches that they have played against South Africa in the Rainbow Nation. Their five ODI wins in South Africa is the lowest that they have won in an overseas country against that particular country. This is taking into account countries in which India have played a minimum of five ODIs.

However, their record against the Proteas at home is 15-13, which is decent. Overall, South Africa have an advantage over India as far as ODI battles between the two nations is concerned.