But alongside this good news, the Survey also states some harsh truths — that global crude oil prices are rising, there are impending challenges to agriculture due to rapid climate change and falling farm incomes, India is simply not harnessing its women power enough and stock markets are overheated. It also speaks of the twin balance sheet problem — weak banks and over-leveraged corporates — and warns of fiscal slippage due to lower-than-expected revenues. And while there seem to be more jobs in the formal sector than previously thought, job creation obviously still remains a big challenge for the government.

So will the Union Budget bring relief for the aam aadmi, businessman as well as the farmer on Thursday? The Budget, the last full-fledged one for the Narendra Modi government, will have to balance populism, growth and fiscal prudence. Since the finance minister will be pulled in multiple directions, there is no reading his mind on what will finally emerge on Budget day. Obviously, raising revenues will be a major priority.

Job creation ought to be one of the Budget’s top priorities. Though the government has taken some steps, a squeeze in the informal sector due to demonetisation hurt these efforts. The Survey notes jobs will remain a pressing medium-term challenge and job creation needs private investment and export growth. Around 1.2 crore people enter the labour market every year, but there simply aren’t enough jobs for all.

A return of the long-term capital gains tax is also possible this Budget. This may pause the sustained bull run seen recently, but the pause is likely to be temporary and the tax could anyway come with riders such as applicability on only future transactions and a longer timeframe for holding scrips. This levy will not just raise revenues but also help the government somewhat deflect criticism that it bats only for the rich. A recent Oxfam report said the richest one per cent of Indians account for 73 per cent of the total gain in national wealth last year. Taxing some of that wealth will surely be acceptable. Besides, with the Survey warning against the rich parking their funds away from real estate and gold, into the stock markets, this space must be closely watched. The proposal for lowering corporation tax to 25 per cent is also up for consideration.