Then, the Survey puts farm distress in perspective, saying that farmers’ incomes will likely be affected by 20-25 per cent due to climate change in the medium term as Indian farmers rely heavily on the monsoons. So where does this leave Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s vision of doubling farmers’ income by 2022? The Survey notes that agriculture GDP and farm revenues have stagnated in the last four years despite increasing production due to “a problem of plenty”, where farm revenues declined for several crops despite increasing production and market prices fell below the Minimum Support Price (MSP).

Farmers want better MSPs for all crops and more crops under MSP. They also want more measures for getting out of the debt trap — the state-specific loan waivers don’t seem to be working well. All these problems will surely figure in the Budget, which is widely expected to offer multiple sops to farmers.

Also, incentives on gender matters in the Budget appear likely. Not only is focus on the girl child a pet theme of the Centre, this will also make eminent economic sense. The Survey says fewer Indian women are working: 36 per cent or one in three a decade back but just 24 per cent or almost one in four now. Fewer working women means lower economic growth. The Survey says there are 63 million “missing women” and 21 million unwanted girls, underlining a grave development challenge that policies must address. Missing women, non-working women, women who continue giving birth in hopes of a son — how does all this affect the economy? The Survey says: “In developing countries, working women also invest more in the schooling of their children… Recently at Davos, IMF chief Christine Lagarde, quoting IMF research, said that women’s participation in the workforce to the level of men can boost the Indian economy by 27 per cent.” It thus won’t be unreasonable to expect a slew of gender-based incentives in the Budget, like some for employers to hire more women and others for women employees.

There is little doubt that this Budget day, the finance minister will take a pause on fiscal consolidation. What remains to be seen is how much slippage he will allow, and whether the Budget bows to populism over prudence.